---
description: >-
  An Exegesis attempting to unravel the interactions between the dominant
  function and the secondary function
---

# Checks and Balances

The Judgment Function is like the President: he calls the shots. The Perception Function is like his intelligence agency, such as the CIA, which supplies the President with information. For the country to run smoothly and deal with other countries, the President and the CIA must work in tandem. The President depends on intelligence from the CIA, and the CIA depends on the President to make the correct decisions based on that information, and to direct the CIA to look at the right things. See the [Parliament of Attitudes](../exegeses-and-hypotheses/parliament-of-attitudes.md) for an exploration of why this may be.

Problems arise when the President and the CIA disregard each other. For instance, in a country with a strong President, the President might order the CIA to only look at information the follows his political goals. However, this will prevent the CIA from properly responding to the world. The President tells the CIA to find out how Iraq is harboring terroriests, but meanwhile, North Korea gets ignored. Oops. Now, the opposite situation occurs with a strong CIA: the CIA will bombard the President will tons of information. "This country is going to attack, and that country is harboring terrorists, so we should bomb here, and here, and here..." Unfortunately, when told that every foreign country deserves to be bombed and that all his citizens are spies, the President will get so out of his depth that he will no longer be able to make any useful decisions on which countries are most deserving of bombing and which spies should be interrogated.

At worst, a President will become a dictator and only use his intelligence agency to assist in his quest for a New World Order, ethnic purity, or saving the whales. Consequently, he will end up pursuing goals that are not relevant in the grand scheme of things, are riddled with assumptions, miss the facts, or are destabilizing to his country. On the other hand, if the CIA takes control, it will see conspiracies everywhere and a spy in every corner, but it won't offer any realistic way to deal with the situation. Flooded by briefs, special reports, and the clamoring of special interest groups, the President will become little more than a puppet. He will make decisions that are way off, such as bombing the wrong countries or ordering the execution of anyone who is vaguely accused of treason.

In other words, the temptation is for IPs and EJs with a Judging [dominant function](../fundamentals/function-attitude/cognitive-stack/dominant-function.md) to put blinders on their [secondary function](../fundamentals/function-attitude/cognitive-stack/secondary-function/) so that it will only conform to the goals of the dominant. Thus, secondary [Extraverted Intuition](../fundamentals/function-attitude/perception/intuition/extraverted-intuition-ne.md) gets stuck in a box when it is supposed to be about thinking outside the box. Secondary [Extraverted Sensation](../fundamentals/function-attitude/perception/sensation/extraverted-sensation-se.md) can no longer make any kind of impact on anything or look at the facts. Secondary [Introverted Intuition](../fundamentals/function-attitude/perception/intuition/introverted-intuition-ni.md) can no longer take an objective view, and secondary [Introverted Sensation](../fundamentals/function-attitude/perception/sensation/introverted-sensation-si.md) will be stuck in chaos. With blinded secondary perception, IPs and EJs massively limit themselves.

For IJs and EPs, the temptation is to overload the Judging [secondary function](../fundamentals/function-attitude/cognitive-stack/secondary-function/) with Perceptions from the [dominant function](../fundamentals/function-attitude/cognitive-stack/dominant-function.md). At some point, the [secondary function](../fundamentals/function-attitude/cognitive-stack/secondary-function/) will become so muddled that it cannot make any logical distinctions, or respond to anyone's needs. Secondary [Extraverted Thinking](../fundamentals/function-attitude/judgement/thinking/extraverted-thinking-te/) is no longer able to establish any practical criteria to objectively evaluate anything, and secondary [Introverted Thinking](../fundamentals/function-attitude/judgement/thinking/introverted-thinking-ti.md) is not able to see any chain of cause-and-effect. Secondary [Extraverted Feeling](../fundamentals/function-attitude/judgement/feeling/extraverted-feeling-fe.md) is not able to establish any social relationships with others, and secondary [Introverted Thinking](../fundamentals/function-attitude/judgement/thinking/introverted-thinking-ti.md) cannot meet anyone's unique needs. With flooded secondary judgment, IJs and EPs are going to end up making very bad decisions.

\
