# Tertiary Temptation

The temptation, when we feel pressure from our [Inferior Function](../inferior-function.md), to explain our problems to ourselves in terms of an attitude opposite to our [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/). This supports the self-understanding of our [Dominant Function](../dominant-function.md) in [Extraverted or Introverted](broken-reference) terms, whichever we are most accustomed to. This cognitive move doesn't lead us to address the real problems, which would require a more genuine change in perspective; it does, however, restore an inner sense of harmony.

For an exploration of why this is, see [Tertiary Defense](https://web.archive.org/web/20060621032431/http://greenlightwiki.com/lenore-exegesis/Tertiary_Defense).

## How it works

### For introverts

When introverts run into a situation that their [Dominant Function](../dominant-function.md) can't handle, they need to adapt by negotiating, going along with the limitations of low-bandwidth social interaction, or otherwise doing something that does not involve total control or understanding of the situation. The [Tertiary Function](./) provides justification for maintaining an [Introverted ](broken-reference)approach directly opposite to the worldly expansiveness that the person is ready for.

Tertiary Si: "I can't possibly go along with this, I don't have any reliable concepts or map to anchor myself with: it's all arbitrary and untrustworthy and meaningless. I'd be diving in without any orientation; I'd be tripped up or harmed from any random direction, and my efforts wouldn't be cumulative. I just won't budge. I'll build myself some barricades and wait for the storm to blow over." The [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/) would say: "Look around, shake up the pot, see what new arises, and deal with it imaginatively; there must be better alternatives available than being stuck here."

Tertiary Ni: "I can't possibly go along with this, 'cuz it's all a lie. It's all a set-up by the Man. I'd just be serving his interests and not my own. I'm not gonna be suckered by all this self-serving bull. No way, man, I gotta go my own way." The [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/) would say: "This thing's bigger than you. Better just go with the flow, do what you can, trust your instincts to deal with what's right here and now."

Tertiary Ti: "I can't possibly go along with this, because it makes no sense. It's filled with internal contradictions. It's crude and not true to the real principles of how this works. It's trying to shove an inappropriately _a priori_ conceptual structure onto the reality. I will have to go by feel, and where it leads I can't know until I get there. I've got to trust this groove regardless of people's arbitrary expectations." The [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/) would say: "You've reached the limits of what you can do alone. You can make others feel important by telling them your needs and asking for their help, and yielding some genuine control to them. See who you can find common cause with."

Tertiary Fi: "I can't possibly go along with this, because it would mar my soul. It's not 'me'. I am a good person, and in order to maintain my integrity, I need to steer clear of this. This is the responsibility of those other people: it emerges from their souls, not mine, so it's their problem." The [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/) would say: "Do _something._ Take responsibility even if no one gave it to you, and go after some tangible gain right now, within the limits of the situation and your current understanding. That will improve your position, after which you can re-assess and plot a new course."

### For extraverts

For extraverts, the **Tertiary Temptation** arises when [Orienting ](../../../../sign-interpretation/orienting/)by socially defined expectations is failing them. To find their way, they need an independent integrity or awareness, which cannot be developed by understanding oneself solely in terms of how people respond to you. The [Tertiary Function](./) provides a way of [Orienting ](../../../../sign-interpretation/orienting/)in an [Extraverted ](broken-reference)way--a way of [Orienting ](../../../../sign-interpretation/orienting/)directly opposite to the [Introverted](broken-reference) discovery that the person's current situation is naturally leading to.

Tertiary Se: "I'll physically intimidate him. I'll brandish a little power and he'll get back in line. Beneath all our refinement, people are just animals, and let me tell you, this animal will not be denied. I'll go with my gut instinct here. You can't know everything in advance, you have to trust your gut in each moment. Good thing my gut is trustworthy. A person with lesser character wouldn't be able to trust his luck the way I can." The [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/) would say: "What is really dangerous here and what's just a paper tiger? What are some options you haven't considered yet only because the current way appears--falsely--to be necessarily so?"

Tertiary Ne: "Ok, then, I'll bluff. We'll see how he responds to that. I don't know where this is leading, but at least it's leading somewhere new. This takes courage. Most people wouldn't have the courage to reach for the unknown at a time like this, but I can, because I can trust my principles to work in any new situation." The [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/) would say: "What are the facts here, really? Set the decision-making criteria aside and look at the facts freely, without without regard to any particular purpose or how the facts appear to others."

Tertiary Te: "Unfair!! I have to stick to my guns, I will not be bullied or cheated. Any number of authorities agree with me. All my friends agree with me. Everyone can see that my response is directly mandated by the situation: anything else would be irresponsible. These facts absolutely settle the matter, and there is no point in looking at it any further." The [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/) would say: "Fair or not, reasonable or not, recognized by anyone or not, what would truly accomplish some good here?"

Tertiary Fe: "I'll lay a guilt trip on this guy, tell him all I've done for him and suggest that the next time he's in a tough spot, he might need my help. Well, hmm, ok, I'll be all friendly. I'll smile, tell him I like him, what a great guy he is. Well, hmm, that's not working, either. Ok, I'll make him look bad in the eyes of his friends." The [Secondary Function](../secondary-function/) would say: "What is the truth? Not what people would agree is true, not an angle on the truth for making it palatable to someone, but the whole, honest truth?"
